Captioning funded by CBS
and FORD.
We go further, so you can.
>> NATIONWIDE SINCE LAST YEAR,
THERE HAS BEEN A 53% INCREASE IN
THE MURDERS OF POLICE OFFICERS.
POLICE DEPARTMENTS ARE DEALING
WITH GROWING RESIGNATIONS, TOO.
SO, IS IT POSSIBLE THAT
"DEFUNDING THE POLICE" MAY HELP?
>> THE ADAGE HAS BEEN IN
LAW ENFORCEMENT SINCE FOREVER:
80% OF WHAT WE DO HAS NOTHING TO
DO WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT.
IT'S ALL SOCIAL WORK.
THE KITTEN-UP-THE-TREE STUFF--
DO YOU NEED A BADGE AND A GUN
FOR THAT?
AND WE'RE STARTING TO CUT AWAY
AT THE THINGS WE'VE ASKED LAW
ENFORCEMENT TO DO, THAT THEY
DON'T WANT TO DO.
( TICKING )
>> THIS IS IT?
>> THAT'S IT.
>> OH, WOW.
IF YOU'RE PLANNING TO TRAVEL
BY AIR OVER THE HOLIDAYS--
AND MILLIONS OF AMERICANS ARE--
WOULD YOU JUMP AT THE CHANCE
TO GET TO YOUR DESTINATION IN
HALF THE TIME?
>> WHEN I LOOK SEVERAL DECADES
OUT, YOU KNOW, WHAT I WANT IS
TO BE ABLE TO BE ANYWHERE IN
THE WORLD IN FOUR HOURS, FOR
100 BUCKS.
NOW, THAT'S NOT WHERE WE START.
BUT THAT'S THE END GOAL.
( TICKING )
>> THAT'S THE TEMPLE OF CASTOR
AND POLLUX?
>> EXACTLY, EXACTLY.
>> THE ROMAN EMPIRE CENTERED
AROUND CONQUESTS, AND THE
OUTSIZED PERSONALITIES OF ITS
EMPERORS.
RESEARCH AND ARCHEOLOGY CONTINUE
TO SEARCH FOR RELIABLE EVIDENCE
FROM THAT TIME.
AND TONIGHT, WE'LL INTRODUCE YOU
TO SOME NEW DISCOVERIES ABOUT
ONE OF THE MOST WRITTEN ABOUT,
IF NOT MISUNDERSTOOD, EMPERORS
OF ALL TIME:
CALIGULA.
I CAN'T BELIEVE THAT WE ARE
SITTING ON THE STEPS THAT
CALIGULA MAY HAVE WALKED ON.
IT'S AMAZING.
( TICKING )
>> I'M LESLEY STAHL.
>> I'M BILL WHITAKER.
>> I'M ANDERSON COOPER.
>> I'M SHARYN ALFONSI.
>> I'M JON WERTHEIM.
>> I'M SCOTT PELLEY.
THOSE STORIES, TONIGHT, ON
"60 MINUTES."
>> Pelley: THIS PAST WEEK,
THE KYLE RITTENHOUSE TRIAL WAS
A SHARP REMINDER OF 2020'S
SUMMER OF PROTEST AGAINST
POLICE VIOLENCE.
AFTER A POLICE SHOOTING OF
JACOB BLAKE IN WISCONSIN LAST
YEAR, RITTENHOUSE, THEN 17, SHOT
AND KILLED TWO DEMONSTRATORS,
AND WOUNDED ANOTHER.
JACOB BLAKE'S SHOOTING CAME
NOT LONG AFTER THE POLICE
KILLINGS OF BREONNA TAYLOR AND
GEORGE FLOYD.
PROTESTS PITTED SUPPORTERS OF
"DEFUND THE POLICE" AGAINST
THOSE WHO "BACKED THE BLUE."
AND WITH A SIGNIFICANT RISE IN
VIOLENT CRIME, PROGRESS ON
REFORM STALLED.
BUT, PHILLIP ATIBA GOFF SEES A
WAY FORWARD.
HE'S A YALE SOCIAL SCIENTIST
WHO'S BEEN ADVISING POLICE
DEPARTMENTS FOR 14 YEARS.
GOFF'S WORK HAS SHOWN THAT
JUSTICE AND SAFETY CAN BE FOUND
IN CITIES THAT ARE REIMAGINING
POLICE.
>> Phillip Atiba Goff: WE FOCUS
ON MAKING POLICING LESS DEADLY,
LESS RACIST, AND OFTEN, JUST
LESS PRESENT.
AND WE LEVERAGE DATA AND
BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE TO DO ALL OF
THAT.
BECAUSE OFTENTIMES, A SCIENTIFIC
PROCESS IS ONE YOU CAN TRUST
WHEN YOU CAN'T TRUST EACH OTHER.
>> Pelley: PHILLIP GOFF IS A
PROFESSOR OF AFRICAN AMERICAN
STUDIES, WITH A Ph.D. IN
PSYCHOLOGY.
HE'S C.E.O. OF THE CENTER FOR
POLICING EQUITY, WHICH ANALYZES
POLICE DATA, 911 CALLS, ARRESTS,
AND TRAFFIC STOPS, TO HELP
CITIES REDUCE RACIAL DISPARITY
AND THE USE OF FORCE.
LAS VEGAS IS ONE EXAMPLE.
LAS VEGAS POLICE DEPARTMENT CAME
TO YOU.
WHAT WAS THEIR QUESTION?
>> Goff: LAS VEGAS METRO, THEY
SAID, "WE THINK WE MIGHT BE
USING TOO MUCH FORCE."
I SAID, "WHY DO YOU THINK THAT?"
THEY SAID, "BECAUSE OUR
COMMUNITY TELLS US SO."
I SAID, "THAT'S A GOOD
INDICATION."
>> Pelley: GOFF DISCOVERED,
MOST USE OF FORCE IN VEGAS CAME
AFTER FOOT CHASES.
>> Goff: SO LITERALLY, THEY
STARTED TRAINING THEIR OFFICERS,
YOU'RE HIGH ON ADRENALINE, YOU
SLOW IT DOWN, YOU COUNT TO TEN.
DON'T TOUCH THE PERSON TILL THE
BACKUP SHOWS UP.
THEY DROPPED THEIR USE OF FORCE
BY 23% THE NEXT MONTH.
AND IT STAYED LOW, AND IT BECAME
A NATIONAL MODEL FOR TRAINING IN
FOOT PURSUITS.
>> Pelley: IN BERKLEY,
CALIFORNIA, GOFF FOUND THE
LARGEST RACIAL BIAS WAS IN
LOW-LEVEL TRAFFIC STOPS, LIKE
BROKEN TAILLIGHTS.
SO, BERKELEY STOPPED ENFORCING
MINOR VIOLATIONS.
>> Goff: THE PLACES WHERE WE
WORK, WE SEE ABOUT A 26%
REDUCTION IN USE OF FORCE AFTER
WE WERE THERE.
DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH OF THAT WAS
US, BUT ALL THE THINGS THEY
TRIED TOGETHER-- ABOUT A
QUARTER, RIGHT, OF THE USE OF
FORCE GOES AWAY.
BUT, IN THIS MOMENT, WHAT WE'RE
GETTING ASKED FOR IS SOMETHING
DIFFERENT.
NOT "HOW DO WE MAKE POLICING
BETTER," BUT "HOW DO WE REMOVE
POLICING FROM THE PLACES WHERE
WE HAVE ABANDONED COMMUNITIES,
AND SO WE ASK POLICE TO PUNISH
PEOPLE WHO WE'VE ABANDONED FOR
GENERATIONS."
THAT'S THE THING THAT'S COMING
NEXT.
>> Pelley: TO SEE WHAT'S COMING
NEXT, WE WENT TO THE CAPITAL OF
TEXAS.
PROFESSOR GOFF IS NOT ADVISING
AUSTIN, BUT THIS LIBERAL CITY OF
ONE MILLION IS FAR ALONG IN
POLICE REFORM, EVEN AGAINST THE
RESERVATIONS OF THE CONSERVATIVE
STATE LEGISLATURE.
>> BLACK LIVES MATTER!
BLACK LIVES MATTER!
>> Pelley: WHEN GEORGE FLOYD WAS
MURDERED IN MINNEAPOLIS IN 2020,
AUSTIN WAS ALREADY SMOLDERING
OVER TWO POLICE KILLINGS OF ITS
OWN.
TWO COPS ARE CHARGED WITH MURDER
IN SHOOTINGS, NINE MONTHS APART,
OF A MENTAL PATIENT, AND AN
UNARMED MAN WHO WAS BLACK AND
LATINO.
IN A DEMONSTRATION IN JULY, AN
ARMED BLACK LIVES MATTER
PROTESTER WAS SHOT AND KILLED...
( GUNFIRE )
...BY A MAN WHO DROVE HIS CAR
INTO THE MARCH.
THE SHOOTER IS CHARGED WITH
MURDER.
AT THE PEAK OF THE UNREST, THE
CITY COUNCIL VOTED UNANIMOUSLY
TO CUT THE POLICE BUDGET 25%--
ABOUT $150 MILLION.
THE IDEA WAS TO PREVENT CRIME--
GIVE POLICE LESS TO DO-- BY
SPENDING THE MONEY ON ADDICTION,
MENTAL ILLNESS AND HOMELESSNESS.
AUSTIN CALLED IT "REIMAGINING
PUBLIC SAFETY."
>> Goff: LAW ENFORCEMENT IS NOT
GOING TO PREVENT THE VIOLENCE.
THEY'RE GOING TO RESPOND TO IT.
AND IF WHAT YOU WANT IS LESS
VIOLENCE, YOU WANT PREVENTION.
>> Pelley: WHEN PEOPLE HEAR
ABOUT REIMAGINING THE POLICE,
THAT SEEMS TO COME UNDER THE
SLOGAN OF DEFUNDING THE POLICE.
AND I THINK MANY PEOPLE LOOK AT
THAT AND THINK, "MY COMMUNITY'S
GOING TO BE LESS SAFE."
>> Goff: I THINK THERE ARE
COMMUNITIES WHERE THAT'S
ABSOLUTELY TRUE.
OF COURSE, YOU WOULD BE.
BUT, WE'VE DEFUNDED THE SCHOOLS
IN THOSE COMMUNITIES.
WE'VE DEFUNDED MENTAL HEALTH.
WE'VE DEFUNDED THE ACTUAL
HOSPITALS.
WE'VE DEFUNDED THE JOBS.
WE'VE DEFUNDED THE HOUSING
SYSTEM.
WE'VE DEFUNDED THE GROCERY
STORES.
WHAT IF, INSTEAD OF TALKING
ABOUT JUST DEFUNDING POLICE,
WE TALKED ABOUT RE-FUNDING TO
THE COMMUNITIES, THOSE AREAS
WHERE WE'VE TAKEN ALL THE
RESOURCES AND THE PUBLIC GOODS
AWAY?
IF WE DID THAT, HOW MUCH SAFER
DO YOU THINK WE WOULD BE?
THE REASON WHY PEOPLE ARE SO
ALLERGIC TO THE IDEA OF LESS
POLICE IS, THEY CAN'T IMAGINE A
WORLD WHERE WE TAKE BETTER CARE
OF THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
VULNERABLE.
>> Pelley: BUT ARGUMENTS LIKE
THAT DIDN'T CARRY THE TEXAS
LEGISLATURE.
( GAVEL )
REPUBLICANS PASSED A LAW
PREVENTING ANY CUTS TO POLICE
BUDGETS IN LARGE CITIES.
THE STATE GOVERNMENT AT THE
CAPITOL HAS TOLD YOU, YOU CANNOT
REDUCE THE POLICE BUDGET.
>> Spencer Cronk: CORRECT.
>> Pelley: SO, AUSTIN CITY
MANAGER SPENCER CRONK PUT THE
MONEY BACK IN THE POLICE BUDGET.
WHAT DOES THAT DO TO YOUR PLAN?
>> Cronk: I THINK IT DOESN'T DO
MUCH, TO BE HONEST, BECAUSE THIS
PLAN HAS NEVER BEEN JUST ABOUT
RESOURCES.
THIS PLAN HAS ALWAYS BEEN ABOUT,
HOW DO WE THINK DIFFERENTLY
ABOUT PROVIDING PUBLIC SAFETY TO
OUR COMMUNITY?
>> Pelley: NOW, CRONK IS
SPENDING THE MONEY DIFFERENTLY
WITHIN THE POLICE BUDGET.
HE'S UNDETERRED, PERHAPS
BECAUSE, BEFORE AUSTIN, HE RAN
THE CITY OF MINNEAPOLIS.
HE LEFT TWO YEARS BEFORE GEORGE
FLOYD WAS MURDERED.
>> Cronk: IT IS ONE OF THOSE
TIMES IN WHICH YOU KNOW THAT
THINGS HAVE TO CHANGE.
>> Pelley: CRONK STARTED THAT
CHANGE BY SHUTTING DOWN THE
AUSTIN POLICE ACADEMY FOR A
YEAR, TO REWRITE THE CURRICULUM.
DO YOU FIND YOURSELF BEING TAKEN
SERIOUSLY AROUND HERE?
>> Anne Kringen: YOU KNOW, I
WOULD SAY, IT VARIES?
>> Pelley: ANNE KRINGEN, WITH A
Ph.D. IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE, WAS
HIRED TO OVERHAUL THE ACADEMY.
SHE WAS ONCE A COP IN VIRGINIA,
AND NOW RUNS THE JUST-REOPENED
ACADEMY, ALONGSIDE 22-YEAR
VETERAN, COMMANDER CATHERINE
JOHNSON.
>> Catherine Johnson: THIS CLASS
IS THE MOST DIVERSE IN AUSTIN
POLICE DEPARTMENT'S HISTORY, AND
WE WANT TO ASK THEM-- AND WE DO
ASK THEM-- IF THEY WANT TO BE A
PART OF THE CHANGE.
>> Pelley: "THAT CHANGE" TONED
DOWN THE ACADEMY'S MILITARY-
STYLE BOOT-CAMP YOU CAN SEE IN
THESE PICTURES FROM 2012.
>> YES, SIR!
>> Pelley: NOW, THERE'S PLENTY
OF ROUGH AND TUMBLE, BUT THE
NEW CURRICULUM EMPHASIZES
DE-ESCALATION IN VIOLENT
SITUATIONS.
THERE'S A COURSE ON THE HISTORY
OF RACE AND POLICING, PLUS
VISITS, IN PLAIN CLOTHES, TO
MEET AND HEAR FROM AUSTIN'S
BLACK, BROWN, ASIAN, AND
L.G.B.T.Q. COMMUNITIES.
AND, THERE ARE LESSONS FROM
THOSE 9.5 MINUTES THAT DEFY
EXPLANATION.
YOU'RE TRAINING THE CADETS TO
INTERVENE IF THEY BELIEVE AN
OFFICER'S DOING THE WRONG THING?
>> Kringen: YES.
>> Johnson: YES.
>> Pelley: THAT'S THE MESSAGE
FROM GEORGE FLOYD?
>> Kringen: I THINK IT'S ONE OF
THE MANY MESSAGES.
I THINK IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT
THAT THEY'RE ABLE TO THINK OF
OTHERS THAT ARE NOT POLICE
OFFICERS, WHO ARE EVERYDAY
AUSTIN CITIZENS, WHO MAY NOT
LOOK LIKE THEM-- THAT THEY CAN
HUMANIZE WITH THEM.
>> Pelley: HOW DO YOU TEACH
SOMEONE TO HEAR THE WORDS, "I
CAN'T BREATHE"?
>> Kringen: IT GOES BACK TO THE
TRAINING, OF THINKING, WHAT IS
THE RESISTANCE LEVEL?
THIS IS A PERSON.
AND THEN I THINK WE ACTUALLY
TEACH THEM THE SKILLS AND THE
TACTICS TO BE ABLE TO SAY, "I
CAN DEAL WITH THIS.
MY FOCUS HAS TO BE ON THEM.
NOT THE CROWD, BUT ON THEM."
>> Pelley: COMMANDER, YOU TALK
ABOUT EMPATHY IN ANSWERING THAT
SAME QUESTION.
>> Johnson: IT'S BEING ABLE TO
UNDERSTAND AND CARE FOR THE
INDIVIDUAL IN THE COMMUNITY THAT
YOU SERVE.
>> Pelley: CAN YOU TEACH THAT?
>> Johnson: YOU CAN TRY.
AND WE'RE GOING TO TRY.
>> BLACK LIVES MATTER!
>> Joseph Chacon: I THINK THAT
THERE REALLY WAS JUST A PALPABLE
ANGER AT THE POLICE THAT WAS
PRESENT IN OUR COMMUNITY, AND
OTHER COMMUNITIES.
TO SOME DEGREE, THAT ANGER STILL
EXISTS.
...THE CITY OF AUSTIN, SO HELP
ME GOD.
>> Pelley: JOSEPH CHACON BECAME
CHIEF LAST MONTH, AFTER HIS TWO
DECADES ON THE FORCE.
ARE YOU ESSENTIALLY ASKING THE
QUESTION, "WHAT ARE THE POLICE
FOR?"
>> Chacon: I THINK THAT IS THE
QUESTION.
YOU HAVE POLICE THAT HAVE BEEN
ASKED TO DO MORE AND MORE
DIFFERENT KINDS OF THINGS.
DO WE NEED TO LOOK AT SCALING
BACK ON WHAT THESE OTHER THINGS
ARE, AND SEE, IS IT MORE
APPROPRIATE FOR, YOU KNOW, A
CIVILIAN OR-- OR SOMEBODY ELSE,
SOME OTHER FUNCTION, TO TAKE
CARE OF THAT?
>> Pelley: CHIEF CHACON'S PLAN
IS TO SEND UNARMED CIVILIAN
EMPLOYEES TO FENDER BENDERS,
VANDALISM, OR TO TAKE REPORTS ON
AUTO THEFTS AND BURGLARIES.
OF ALL THE CALLS TO 911, ONLY 1%
INVOLVE VIOLENT CRIME-- MUCH THE
SAME AS PHILIP GOFF SEES IN THE
CITIES HE'S CONSULTING.
>> Goff: AND THE ADAGE HAS
BEEN IN LAW ENFORCEMENT
SINCE FOREVER, 80% OF
WHAT WE DO HAS NOTHING TO DO
WITH-- WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT.
IT'S ALL SOCIAL WORK.
SO, ONCE THE 911 CALLS SAY,
"HERE'S WHAT THE USES OF LAW
ENFORCEMENT ARE," YOU CAN SAY,
"HEY, THIS STUFF, THE KITTEN-UP-
THE-TREE STUFF, DO YOU NEED A
BADGE AND A GUN FOR THAT?
THE SUBSTANCE-USE STUFF.
YOU WANT A SOCIAL WORKER TO GO
THERE, SOMEONE WHO'S ACTUALLY
TRAINED IN SUBSTANCE ABUSE?
MENTAL HEALTH STUFF.
HOW ABOUT WE SEND SOMEONE WHO'S
TRAINED IN THAT, TO GO DO THAT?"
AND WE'RE STARTING TO CUT AWAY
AT THE THINGS WE'VE ASKED LAW
ENFORCEMENT TO DO, THAT THEY
DON'T WANT TO DO.
>> AUSTIN 911, WHAT'S YOUR
EMERGENCY?
>> Pelley: AMONG THOSE THINGS
ARE MENTAL HEALTH CALLS.
>> DO YOU HAVE THOUGHTS OF
SUICIDE OR SELF-HARM?
>> Pelley: AND THIS IS WHERE
AUSTIN IS A CITY LEADING THE
NATION.
>> Ken Murphy: SO NOW IN THE
CITY OF AUSTIN, WHEN YOU CALL
911, YOU WILL HEAR, "DO YOU
NEED POLICE, FIRE, E.M.S., OR
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES?"
>> Pelley: POLICE LIEUTENANT KEN
MURPHY MANAGES 911.
>> Murphy: I DO BELIEVE ADDING
THE FOURTH OPTION TO MENTAL
HEALTH IS THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF
911.
>> Pelley: IN AUSTIN, 911'S
"FOURTH OPTION" DISPATCHES
MENTAL HEALTH CLINICIANS WHEN
INTERVENTION IS NEEDED, BUT
THERE'S NO APPARENT THREAT OF
VIOLENCE.
>> Pelley: IN 2021, THIS WAS THE
RESULT.
>> Murphy: WE WERE ABLE TO
DIVERT 3,564 CALLS AWAY FROM
POLICE RESPONSE.
>> Pelley: SO, THOSE WERE 3,600
CALLS THE POLICE NEVER GOT--
THEY DIDN'T HAVE TO RESPOND--
>> Murphy: CORRECT.
>> Pelley: WHICH LEFT THEM TO DO
WHATEVER ELSE THEY NEEDED TO DO.
>> Murphy: RESPOND TO EMERGENCY
SITUATIONS.
>> Pelley: THAT WORK-LOAD OFF
COPS COMES AT A CRITICAL MOMENT.
LIKE MANY CITIES, CHIEF JOSEPH
CHACON'S DEPARTMENT IS SUFFERING
A QUIET CRISIS.
POLICE OFFICERS I'VE TALKED TO
HAVE TOLD ME, SINCE GEORGE
FLOYD, THAT THEY DON'T FEEL LIKE
THEY ARE RESPECTED.
COPS ARE RETIRING ALL OVER THE
COUNTRY.
>> Chacon: YEAH, THEY'RE
RETIRING HERE AS WELL.
MY ATTRITION RATE IS ABOUT
TRIPLE WHAT IT WAS FOUR YEARS
AGO.
BUT WHAT I TELL OUR OFFICERS IS
THAT, I KNOW THE MEN AND WOMEN
OF THIS DEPARTMENT.
I KNOW THEIR HEARTS.
AND WHEN THEY'RE OUT THERE AND
THEY'RE DOING THEIR JOB, THEY
NEED TO CONCENTRATE ON THAT, AND
NOT ON ANY FALSE NARRATIVE THERE
MIGHT BE ABOUT HOW POLICING IS
JUST ABSOLUTELY BROKEN.
CAN WE DO THINGS BETTER?
CERTAINLY.
BUT THERE'S MANY THINGS THAT I
THINK THAT WE DO VERY WELL.
>> Pelley: THE PERIOD AFTER
GEORGE FLOYD HAS BEEN DEADLY FOR
OFFICERS, TOO.
THE F.B.I. REPORTS, THIS YEAR,
66 HAVE BEEN MURDERED, A 53%
JUMP FROM 2020.
THE LEADING CAUSE OF THESE
DEATHS HAS BEEN UNPROVOKED
ATTACKS.
AUSTIN, AND CITIES ADVISED BY
PHILIP GOFF, ARE ASKING WHETHER
JUSTICE AND SAFETY CAN BE FOUND
IN RELIEVING POVERTY, ADDICTION,
AND MENTAL ILLNESS, WHILE
FOCUSING POLICE ON THOSE "THINGS
THEY DO VERY WELL."
>> Goff: THEY COULD BE THE MODEL
FOR HOW WE START OVER AT KEEPING
THE VULNERABLE FOLKS IN OUR
COMMUNITIES SAFE.
THEY COULD SAY, "WE'RE GOING
TO DO THIS DIFFERENTLY THAN
WE'VE EVER DONE THIS IN THE
UNITED STATES BEFORE."
THEY COULD BE WHO WE TELL
OURSELVES WE ALREADY ARE, ABOUT
RACIAL JUSTICE IN THIS COUNTRY.
THAT'S-- THAT'S THE PROMISE.
( TICKING )
>> Whitaker: IF YOU ARE
PLANNING TO TRAVEL BY AIR OVER
THE THANKSGIVING OR CHRISTMAS
HOLIDAYS-- AND MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS ARE-- WOULD YOU JUMP
AT THE CHANCE TO GET TO YOUR
DESTINATION IN HALF THE TIME?
DOES NEW YORK TO LOS ANGELES IN
UNDER THREE HOURS SOUND
APPEALING?
THE LAST COMMERCIAL SUPERSONIC
FLIGHT WAS ALMOST 20 YEARS AGO,
AND EVEN THEN, SUPER-FAST
FLIGHTS WERE ONLY ON VERY
LIMITED ROUTES.
MOST OF TODAY'S JETLINERS
ACTUALLY FLY MORE SLOWLY THAN
THEY DID 20 OR 30 YEARS AGO,
IN ORDER TO SAVE FUEL.
BUT THAT MAY BE ABOUT TO CHANGE.
IT'S STILL A LONG SHOT, BUT
PRIVATE START-UP COMPANIES--
WITH A BIG ASSIST FROM NASA--
MAY JUST GIVE US ALL ANOTHER
CHANCE TO FLY FASTER THAN THE
SPEED OF SOUND.
( JET ROAR )
WHEN BRITISH AIRWAYS FLIGHT 002
ROARED INTO THE NEW YORK SKY ON
OCTOBER 24, 2003, EVERYONE ON
BOARD-- PASSENGERS AND PILOTS--
KNEW THAT SOMETHING SPECIAL WAS
COMING TO AN END.
>> Pilot: ENJOY THE MOMENT, AS
YOU ARE THE LAST PEOPLE IN THE
WORLD, AS PASSENGERS, TO CRUISE
AT TWICE THE SPEED OF SOUND.
>> Whitaker: THE SUPERSONIC
CONCORDE, A JOINT EFFORT OF THE
BRITISH AND FRENCH GOVERNMENTS,
WAS MAKING ITS LAST FLIGHT AFTER
NEARLY 30 YEARS IN THE AIR,
GROUNDED BY A COMBINATION OF
STRATOSPHERIC COSTS, AND
SFETY CONCERNS AFTER A DEADLY
CRASH IN 2000.
EVEN PEOPLE WATCHING THAT
LAST LANDING IN LONDON WERE
EMOTIONAL.
>> Kid: I JUST LOVE AIRPLANES.
>> Interviewer: AND THERE'S NOT
GOING TO BE ANYTHING LIKE
CONCORDE AGAIN, IS THERE?
>> Kid: NEVER.
>> Whitaker: WELL, YOU KNOW THAT
OLD MAXIM, "NEVER SAY NEVER?"
>> Blake Scholl: SUPERSONIC'S
COMING BACK.
AND IT'S GOING TO BE DIFFERENT
THIS TIME.
IT'S-- IT'S BACK TO STAY.
>> Whitaker: BLAKE SCHOLL IS THE
FOUNDER AND C.E.O. OF BOOM.
HIS AUDACIOUS GOAL IS TO BUILD A
NEW SUPERSONIC AIRLINER FROM
SCRATCH.
HAS A PRIVATE COMPANY EVER BUILT
A SUPERSONIC AIRCRAFT, ANYWHERE?
>> Scholl: NO.
NO, NOWHERE.
IT'S BEEN GOVERNMENTS AND
MILITARIES ONLY.
>> Whitaker: BOOM IS NOT THE
ONLY AMERICAN START-UP COMPANY
IN THE NEW SUPERSONIC
SWEEPSTAKES.
SPIKE IS DEVELOPING AN
ULTRA-FAST BUSINESS JET, AND
HERMEUS ASPIRES TO MAKE A
HYPERSONIC PLANE THAT WOULD FLY
FIVE TIMES THE SPEED OF SOUND.
BUT BOOM IS THE ONLY ENTRANT TO
ACTUALLY BUILD AN AIRPLANE.
THIS IS IT?
>> Scholl: THAT'S IT.
>> Whitaker: OH, WOW.
SO FAR, BLAKE SCHOLL AND BOOM
HAVE BUILT THIS SINGLE-SEATER
TEST PLANE, DUE TO MAKE ITS
FIRST FLIGHT NEXT YEAR.
THE PASSENGER JET MEANT TO
FOLLOW IS CALLED OVERTURE.
IT ONLY EXISTS IN ARTIST
RENDERINGS, BUT IT'S REAL ENOUGH
FOR ONE OF AMERICA'S LARGEST
AIRLINES TO CLIMB ON BOARD.
SO, IS THE OVERTURE THE PLANE
THAT UNITED RECENTLY ORDERED?
>> Scholl: THAT'S RIGHT.
UNITED JUST ORDERED 15 OVERTURE
AIRPLANES.
SO, MORE OVERTURES THAN
CONCORDES WERE EVER DELIVERED
INTO SERVICE.
>> Whitaker: IS THIS UNITED DEAL
LIKE A-- A STAMP OF APPROVAL?
>> Scholl: I THINK IT'S
INCREDIBLY VALIDATING.
YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU ARE UNITED,
YOU TAKE-- YOU TAKE THESE THINGS
REALLY SERIOUSLY.
>> Whitaker: SERIOUSLY ENOUGH TO
PRODUCE A SLICK PROMOTIONAL
VIDEO THAT'S ALREADY PLAYING ON
MANY UNITED FLIGHTS.
♪ ♪ ♪
>> Whitaker: THE AD MAY SAY
"SUPERSONIC IS HERE," BUT IT'S
NOT-- NOT YET.
BLAKE SCHOLL IS A SOFTWARE
ENGINEER WHO STARTED HIS CAREER
AT AMAZON, NOT IN AEROSPACE.
BUT HE INSISTS HE'S GOING TO
MAKE IT HAPPEN.
>> Scholl: WHEN I LOOK SEVERAL
DECADES OUT, YOU KNOW, WHAT I
WANT IS TO BE ABLE TO BE
ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD IN
FOUR HOURS, FOR 100 BUCKS.
NOW, THAT'S NOT WHERE WE START.
BUT THAT'S THE END GOAL.
>> Whitaker: THE CONCORDE
CHARGED THOUSANDS-- THOUSANDS OF
DOLLARS FOR A ONE-WAY FLIGHT
FROM NEW YORK TO LONDON.
HOW IS IT GOING TO BE POSSIBLE
FOR YOU TO HAVE A SIMILAR FLIGHT
EXPERIENCE FOR $100?
>> Scholl: YOU KEEP ITERATING.
AND SO, THE SAME WAY-- YOU KNOW,
FOR EXAMPLE, ELECTRIC CARS, WHEN
THEY FIRST CAME OUT, THEY WERE
PRETTY EXPENSIVE.
BUT WE KEPT WORKING ON THEM.
AND THE PRICE CAME DOWN.
THEY GOT BETTER AND BETTER.
AND SO, WE'RE GOING TO DO THE
SAME THING WITH SUPERSONIC JETS.
WE'RE GOING TO KEEP WORKING ON
THEM.
WE'RE GOING TO KEEP INNOVATING.
>> Jon Ostrower: THIS INDUSTRY
NEEDS PEOPLE DREAMING BIG.
THAT IS ESSENTIAL.
THIS INDUSTRY WAS BUILT ON THAT.
>> Whitaker: JON OSTROWER IS
EDITOR IN CHIEF OF THE "AIR
CURRENT," A PUBLICATION THAT
TRACKS EVERY DEVELOPMENT IN
COMMERICAL AVIATION, INCLUDING
BOOM AND BLAKE SCHOLL.
HE ADMITS THAT IT'S--
SOMETHING LIKE HE IS PROPOSING
HAS NEVER BEEN DONE BY A PRIVATE
COMPANY BEFORE.
BUT YET, HE'S CONVINCED THAT HE
CAN DO IT.
DO YOU THINK HE CAN?
>> Ostrower: I THINK YOU CANNOT
IGNORE THE OBSTACLES THAT WILL
BE ON THE PATH TO GETTING THERE.
AND I THINK THE AMOUNT OF MONEY
THAT IS-- IS REQUIRED TO MAKE
THIS HAPPEN, MAKES THIS A VERY
LONG SHOT.
>> Whitaker: HOW MUCH MONEY WILL
IT TAKE?
>> Ostrower: PROBABLY IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD OF AT LEAST $15 OR
$20 BILLION.
>> Whitaker: OSTROWER SAYS
THAT'S ABOUT WHAT IT COST BOEING
TO DEVELOP AND BUILD AND CERTIFY
A NEW SUB-SONIC AIRLINER, AND
THEY ALREADY HAVE HUGE
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES.
BOOM DOESN'T.
BLAKE SCHOLL TOLD US HE CAN GET
OVERTURE BUILT FOR $7 TO $8
BILLION, BUT THAT'S A LOT MORE
THAN THE $300 MILLION HE'S
RAISED SO FAR.
AND MONEY'S NOT THE ONLY HURDLE.
BOOM AND UNITED HAVE PROMISED
THEIR NEW PLANE WILL OPERATE ON
100% SUSTAINABLE AVIATION FUEL,
BUT THAT DOESN'T EXIST YET IN
ANYTHING LIKE THE QUANTITIES
THEY'LL NEED.
OH, AND ONE OTHER THING:
>> Ostrower: THEY'RE GOING TO
NEED AN ENGINE TO DO THIS.
>> Whitaker: AND THEY DON'T HAVE
THE ENGINE YET.
>> Ostrower: THEY DON'T HAVE AN
ENGINE.
>> Whitaker: BLAKE SCHOLL SAYS
AN ENGINE IS ON THE WAY, FROM
THE SAME COMPANY THAT BUILT THE
SUPERSONIC ENGINES FOR THE
CONCORDE.
>> Scholl: AND WE ARE WORKING
WITH ROLLS ROYCE ON A CUSTOM JET
ENGINE THAT WILL POWER OVERTURE.
>> Whitaker: YOU'RE WORKING WITH
ROLLS ROYCE.
IT-- IT DOESN'T EX-- THIS ENGINE
DOES NOT EXIST YET?
>> Scholl: IT IS A-- IT IS A
LIGHTLY CUSTOMIZED ENGINE.
AND PART OF THAT IS ROLLS
ROYCE'S WORK, WHERE THEY'RE KIND
OF TURNING SOME DESIGN KNOBS.
>> Whitaker: BLAKE SCHOLL
DOESN'T DISMISS THE SKEPTICS,
BUT HE POINTS TO THE EXAMPLE
OF ELON MUSK, AND SAYS NOT SO
LONG AGO, NO ONE THOUGHT HE
COULD BUILD TESLAS AND REUSABLE
ROCKETS.
WHERE DOES THIS PASSION COME
FROM?
>> Scholl: IT'S BECAUSE WE
STOPPED MAKING PROGRESS ON THE
SPEED OF TRAVEL.
YOU KNOW, THE AIRPLANES WE HAVE
TODAY ARE NO FASTER THAN THE
ONES WE HAD WHEN MY PARENTS WERE
GROWING UP.
AND THERE IS NO GOOD REASON FOR
THAT.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO BE.
WE CAN FIX IT.
>> Whitaker: WHEN DO YOU EXPECT
THE FIRST PAYING CUSTOMERS TO
FLY ON ONE OF YOUR PLANES?
>> Scholl: BY THE END OF THE
DECADE.
>> Whitaker: SUPERSONIC REALLY
ONLY MAKES SENSE ON FLIGHTS OF
FOUR OR FIVE HOURS, OR MORE.
BUT THOUSANDS OF SUCH ROUTES ARE
OUT OF REACH TO BOOM.
THE REASON IS IN THE VERY NAME
OF HIS COMPANY.
( SONIC BOOM )
THAT'S THE SOUND OF A SONIC BOOM
CREATED BY A PLANE BREAKING THE
SOUND BARRIER.
LISTEN AGAIN:
( SONIC BOOM )
THE FIRST BOOM WAS MADE BY CHUCK
YEAGER'S X-1 ROCKET PLANE WHEN
IT PASSED THROUGH MACH ONE--
ABOUT 660 MILES PER HOUR--
BACK IN 1947.
>> Announcer: AND HE DOES IT.
( SONIC BOOM )
>> Whitaker: WHAT IS THE SONIC
BOOM?
WHAT-- WHAT GENERATES IT?
>> Mike Buonanno: SO, WHEN AN
AIRCRAFT FLIES FASTER THAN THE
SPEED OF SOUND, IT CREATES
DISTURBANCES.
>> Whitaker: MIKE BUONANNO IS A
TOP ENGINEER AT LOCKHEED
MARTIN'S "SKUNKWORKS" AIRCRAFT
DESIGN STUDIO IN CALIFORNIA.
DAVE RICHARDSON IS HIS BOSS.
>> Dave Richardson: A LOT OF US
UNDERSTAND THE WAKE THAT'S
GENERATED BY A SHIP OR A BOAT.
AND SO, IMAGINE THAT WAKE FROM A
SPEED BOAT OR WHATEVER, ALL
THOSE DIFFERENT WAVES COMING TO
BE ONE LARGE WAVE.
>> Buonanno: THOSE INDIVIDUAL
DISTURBANCES CREATED UP BY THE
AIRPLANE, THEY COMBINE TOGETHER
TO MAKE A LOUD DOUBLE BANG.
>> Whitaker: THE FEDERAL
AVIATION ADMINISTRATION TESTED
THE IMPACT OF THAT BIG BANG BACK
IN 1964, BY FLYING MILITARY
SUPERSONIC JETS LIKE THESE OVER
OKLAHOMA CITY FOR SIX MONTHS.
THE OUTCOME?
BROKEN BRICKS AND CEILINGS,
FRAYED NERVES AND PUBLIC
OUTRAGE.
>> Buonanno: IT WAS JUST
PATENTLY OBVIOUS THAT NO ONE WAS
GOING TO TOLERATE SUCH A LOUD
NOISE ON A DAY-TO-DAY BASIS.
>> Whitaker: THE RESULT WAS A
BAN ON CIVILIAN SUPERSONIC
FLIGHTS EVERYWHERE IN THE WORLD,
OTHER THAN OVER OPEN WATER.
>> Buonanno: AND THAT BASICALLY
HIT THE BRAKES ON THE
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMERCIAL
AIR TRAVEL, IN TERMS OF AN
ADVANCING SPEED.
UP UNTIL THAT BAN, EVERY DECADE,
AIR TRAVEL HAD GOTTEN FASTER AND
FASTER.
>> Whitaker: THE BAN REMAINS IN
PLACE TODAY.
SO, IF BOOM GETS ITS OVERTURE IN
THE AIR, IT WILL ONLY BE ABLE TO
SERVE LONG TRANS-OCEANIC ROUTES,
SIMILAR TO WHAT THE CONCORDE
FLEW.
>> Buonanno: SO IF YOU WANT TO
GO FROM J.F.K. IN NEW YORK TO
PARIS, THAT'S OKAY.
BUT FOR MANY OF US, WE WANT TO
FLY PLACES OVER LAND.
HERE LIVING IN LOS ANGELES,
ALMOST EVERYWHERE I WANT TO GO--
FLYING EAST, REQUIRES OVER-LAND
TRAVEL.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE
BIG PROBLEMS THAT WE'RE
TRYING TO SOLVE.
>> Whitaker: BUONANNO AND
RICHARDSON AND THEIR LOCKHEED
MARTIN TEAM HAVE BEEN
COMMISSIONED BY NASA TO BUILD A
TEST PLANE THAT CAN FLY TWICE AS
FAST AS CURRENT AIRLINERS,
WITHOUT RATTLING NERVES OR
BREAKING WINDOWS.
YOUR MISSION IS TO GET RID OF
THIS SONIC BOOM?
>> Buonanno: THAT'S RIGHT.
THE ENTIRE POINT OF THE AIRPLANE
IS TO REDUCE SONIC BOOM.
>> Whitaker: THE AIRPLANE IS
CALLED THE X-59.
IT WILL LOOK LIKE THIS, WHEN
IT MAKES ITS FIRST FLIGHT NEXT
YEAR.
FOR NOW, IT LOOKS LIKE THIS,
INSIDE LOCKHEED MARTIN'S
ASSEMBLY BUILDING.
>> Richardson: YOU'RE LOOKING AT
THE COCKPIT OF THE AIRPLANE, AND
THERE'S NO FORWARD WINDSCREEN.
THIS IS IT.
>> Whitaker: EVERY PART OF THE
X-59 IS STREAMLINED AND SMOOTH,
TO DISPERSE SOUND WAVES AND
TRANSFORM THE LOUD SONIC BOOM
INTO A MUCH QUIETER "THUMP."
>> Nils Larson: IF YOU LOOK AT
IT, IT'S PRETTY SLICK.
I MEAN, IT LOOKS LIKE A DART.
>> Whitaker: NILS LARSON IS THE
NASA TEST PILOT WHOSE JOB IT
WILL BE TO PROVE THAT THE X-59
CAN REPLACE THE SONIC BOOM WITH
A SIMPLE THUMP.
STARTING NEXT YEAR, HE'LL PILOT
SOME OF THE EARLY TEST FLIGHTS,
AND THEN ITS FIRST SOUND TESTS.
>> Larson: THAT'S COMING TO A
TOWN NEAR YOU.
SO, OUR RESEARCHERS ARE GOING
TO WORK WITH THE PUBLIC, AND
WE'RE GOING TO FLY OVER VARIOUS
CITIES AND TOWNS, AND THEY'RE
GOING TO GIVE US THE FEEDBACK
OF THAT THUMP.
WAS THAT THUMP TOO LOUD?
YOU KNOW, DID YOU EVEN HEAR IT
AT ALL?
>> Whitaker: SO, IF YOU ARE ABLE
TO FLY OVER POPULATED AREAS, AND
PROVIDE THIS DATA, THEN THE
F.A.A. WILL USE THIS DATA,
PERHAPS, TO LIFT THIS BAN?
>> Larson: EXACTLY.
>> Whitaker: ARE WE LIKELY TO
SEE PLANES IN THE FUTURE FLYING
SUPERSONIC THAT LOOK LIKE THIS
ONE?
>> Larson: I CERTAINLY HOPE SO.
AND I THINK YOU WILL.
SO, THERE ARE DEFINITE THINGS
THAT YOU WOULD SEE, IF YOU
WALKED INTO A COMMERCIAL, YOU
KNOW, SUPERSONIC AIRPLANE HERE,
YOU KNOW, TEN, 12 YEARS FROM
NOW, AND YOU WERE TO LOOK AT
THAT, YOU COULD SEE, YOU KNOW,
SOME D.N.A. THAT GOES BACK TO
THE X-59.
>> Whitaker: LARSON TOOK US OVER
TO NASA'S X-59 FLIGHT SIMULATOR,
AND THE FIRST THING WE NOTICED
IS THAT THERE'S A TV SCREEN IN
PLACE OF THE MISSING WINDSHIELD.
FOR YOU, DOES IT WORK AS WELL AS
USING YOUR OWN EYES?
>> Larson: YEAH, I THINK--
SO FAR, I THINK IT DOES.
ABOUT TO GO THROUGH MACH ONE.
THERE'S MACH ONE.
YOU KNOW, YOU SEE--
>> Whitaker: SO WE'RE NOW GOING
SUPERSONIC.
>> Larson: YUP, YOU'RE NOW
>> Whitaker: LARSON GAVE ME A
TURN IN THE COCKPIT-- NOT TO
FLY SUPERSONIC, BUT TO LAND THE
X-59-- WHICH IS TRICKY, GIVEN
THAT IT'S SHAPED LIKE A PENCIL,
HAS NO WINDSHIELD, AND I'M NOT A
PILOT.
>> Larson: COME UP, FOLLOW THEM
UP JUST A LITTLE BIT.
SO, PULL BACK JUST A LITTLE BIT,
LITTLE BIT MORE.
AND JUST HOLD IT RIGHT THERE.
HOLD IT RIGHT THERE.
THERE YOU GO.
YOU JUST LANDED THE X-59.
AND IN THE MIDDLE OF THE RUNWAY!
>> Whitaker: I LANDED-- I LANDED
THE--
>> Larson: THAT'S BETTER THAN I
DID.
( LAUGHS )
SIGN HIM UP!
>> Whitaker: NILS LARSON WILL
START TEST-FLYING THE REAL X-59
SOMETIME NEXT YEAR.
AND SOON AFTER THAT, HE'LL BE
FLYING IT OVER US.
AND IF IT'S QUIET ENOUGH, FUTURE
PLANES THAT FOLLOW ITS DESIGN
LEAD COULD EVENTUALLY FLY US
LOTS OF PLACES, TWICE AS FAST AS
WE CAN GET THERE NOW.
WHEN MIGHT I BE ABLE TO FLY FROM
NEW YORK TO LOS ANGELES IN A
SUPERSONIC PLANE?
>> Richardson: SO THERE'S--
THERE'S A LONG LINE OF THINGS
THAT HAVE TO HAPPEN, STARTING
WITH THE X-59.
BUT I THINK 2035 IS YOUR ANSWER,
IF EVERYTHING MARCHES ALONG THE
WAY THAT IT'S SUPPOSED TO.
>> Whitaker: IT'S SOMETHING THAT
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN TRYING TO SOLVE
FOR-- FOR DECADES.
HAVE YOU GUYS SOLVED THAT
PROBLEM?
>> Buonanno: WE BELIEVE WE HAVE.
IT'S REWARDING SEEING IT GETTING
BUILT.
BUT I THINK THAT REAL "AHA"
MOMENT FOR ME IS GOING TO BE
WHEN I HEAR THAT FIRST SHAPED
BOOM FROM X-59.
>> Whitaker: THUMP, THUMP.
>> Buonanno: THUMP, THUMP.
>> Richardson: WE WON'T HEAR
THIS BANG.
AND WHEN WE HEAR, OR DON'T HEAR,
THAT SOUND, IS WHEN WE KNOW WE
DID IT.
( TICKING )
>> Cooper: WHEN WORKERS
BROKE GROUND ON AN UNDERGROUND
PARKING LOT IN THE HEART OF ROME
15 YEARS AGO, THEY HAD NO IDEA
WHAT THEIR BACKHOES WERE ABOUT
TO UNEARTH.
THE SITE TURNED OUT TO BE WHAT
ITALIAN ARCHEOLOGISTS BELIEVE
WAS ONCE "THE PLEASURE GARDENS"
OF THE ROMAN EMPEROR CALIGULA--
WHERE SOME 2,000 YEARS AGO, ALL
SORTS OF LAVISH PARTIES, ROYAL
INTRIGUE, AND DEBAUCHED BEHAVIOR
LIKELY TOOK PLACE.
CALIGULA BECAME THE THIRD
EMPEROR OF ROME IN 37 A.D.,
AND HE REIGNED FOR BARELY
FOUR YEARS.
HE'S BEEN PORTRAYED IN HISTORY
AS ONE OF THE MOST DERANGED AND
DESPICABLE ROMAN EMPERORS EVER
TO RULE, BUT FOR YEARS, SCHOLARS
HAVE BEEN RE-EXAMINING PARTS OF
CALIGULA'S STORY, TO SEE IF
HISTORY HAS IT RIGHT.
COULD WE DISCOVER SOME NEW
FRAGMENTS OF TRUTH IN CALIGULA'S
GARDENS?
WE WERE MORE THAN HAPPY TO GO TO
ROME, TO FIND OUT.
THE TEMPLES AND PALACES OF
ANCIENT ROME MAY HAVE CRUMBLED
LONG AGO, BUT THE LEGEND OF ONE
OF ITS ODDEST EMPERORS LIVES ON.
>> Caligula: DOWN ON YOUR KNEES,
ALL OF YOU.
BEND YOUR HEADS.
I SHALL SEVER EACH ONE AT THE
NECK.
>> Cooper: WHAT MOST PEOPLE
KNOW ABOUT CALIGULA COMES
FROM THIS ICONIC BBC SERIES,
"I, CLAUDIUS," WHICH WAS BASED
ON TWO HISTORICAL NOVELS BY
ROBERT GRAVES.
♪ ♪ ♪
IN THE SHOW, CALIGULA TURNS
HIS PALACE INTO A BROTHEL,
MAKES HIS HORSE A HIGH-RANKING
SENATOR, AND DECLARES HIMSELF A
LIVING GOD.
>> Caligula: FOR NOW, YOU MAY
ADDRESS ME AS ZEUS.
>> Cooper: IT'S A TORRID TALE OF
INCEST, INFANTICIDE...
>> DON'T GO IN THERE.
>> Caligula: ( LAUGHS )
>> Cooper: ...AND IMPERIAL
MADNESS.
>> HELP ME!
>> Cooper: BUT HOW MUCH OF THAT
PORTRAYAL IS REAL?
DID CALIGULA IMPREGNATE HIS
SISTER AND THEN EAT HER BABY?
>> Andrew Wallace-Hadrill:
( LAUGHS )
CALIGULA DID NOT IMPREGNATE HIS
SISTER AND EAT HER BABY.
>> Cooper: DID CALIGULA MAKE A
HORSE A HIGH-RANKING SENATOR OR
CONSUL?
>> Wallace-Hadrill: NO, NO, OF
COURSE HE DIDN'T.
>> Cooper: DID HE TURN HIS
PALACE INTO A BROTHEL?
>> Wallace-Hadrill: NO.
>> Cooper: SO, WHERE DID ALL
THESE IDEAS COME FROM?
>> Wallace-Hadrill: WELL,
LARGELY FROM ROBERT GRAVES.
YOU KNOW, HIS "I, CLAUDIUS"
NOVELS ARE AWESOME.
BUT HE WASN'T AN ACADEMIC.
HE WAS A WRITER.
>> Cooper: ANDREW WALLACE-
HADRILL IS AN ACADEMIC-- A
PROFESSOR EMERITUS AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, AND
HE'S CLOSELY STUDIED THE FEW
WRITTEN ACCOUNTS THAT SURVIVE
FROM CALIGULA'S TIME.
I GREW UP WATCHING "I,
CLAUDIUS."
I LOVED THE BOOK.
I LOVE THE OLD TV SERIES.
YOU'RE TELLING ME, A LOT OF THAT
JUST WASN'T TRUE.
>> Wallace-Hadrill: NOW, WHAT
I'M NOT DENYING IS THEY HAD SEX
IN THE PALACE.
OF COURSE THEY HAD SEX.
( LAUGHS )
PRETTY SPECTACULARLY, OF COURSE
THEY HAD SEX.
>> Cooper: ( LAUGHS )
PRETTY SPECTACULARLY?
>> Cooper: BUT WALLACE-HADRILL
DOES BELIEVE CALIGULA COULD BE
VERY IMPULSIVE AND BRUTAL, AND
HE DOESN'T RULE OUT THE
POSSIBILITY THAT HE MAY HAVE HAD
A SEVERE PHYSICAL OR MENTAL
DISORDER.
>> Wallace-Hadrill: I THINK
THERE'S A SERIOUS DANGER THAT
CALIGULA WAS-- WAS PATHOLOGICAL,
THAT HE ACTUALLY DIDN'T CARE
ABOUT THE HURT HE CAUSED.
>> Cooper: WALLACE-HADRILL SAYS
ROBERT GRAVES' NOVELS WERE
LARGELY BASED ON STORIES
PUBLISHED AROUND 121 A.D.,
80 YEARS AFTER CALIGULA'S DEATH,
BY SUETONIUS, A WELL-KNOWN
BIOGRAPHER AND ADVISER TO LATER
EMPERORS.
BUT SUETONIUS OFTEN HAD TO RELY
ON SECOND-HAND STORIES AND
GOSSIP FROM MEMBERS OF THE
IMPERIAL COURT.
>> Wallace-Hadrill: THESE
MEMBERS OF THE COURT, IT'S--
YOU KNOW, IT'S LIKE STAFFERS IN
THE WHITE HOUSE.
IT'S LIKE ALL THOSE LEAKY PEOPLE
IN BUCKINGHAM PALACE.
WHAT ARE THESE STORIES WORTH?
HOW CAN YOU PIN THEM DOWN?
( CHURCH BELLS )
>> Cooper: ARCHEOLOGY CAN
HELP PIN DOWN THE PAST, BUT IN A
CITY FULL OF AMAZING RUINS, NOT
MUCH DIRECTLY LINKED TO CALIGULA
HAD BEEN DISCOVERED--
THAT IS, UNTIL 2006.
( CONSTRUCTION )
WHEN A PENSION FUND FOR ITALIAN
DOCTORS CALLED ENPAM STARTED
DIGGING AN UNDERGROUND PARKING
GARAGE FOR ITS NEW OFFICE
BUILDING IN THE ESQUILINO
NEIGHBORHOOD OF ROME.
IN ANCIENT TIMES, THIS WAS ONE
OF A NUMBER OF TRANQUIL GARDEN
ESTATES LOCATED ABOUT TEN
MINUTES BY CARRIAGE FROM THE
BUSTLING ROMAN FORUM.
THESE RE-CREATIONS FROM ROME'S
SUPERINTENDENT OF ANTIQUITIES
GIVE SOME SENSE OF THE SPRAWLING
GROUNDS AND BUILDINGS ENJOYED BY
EMPERORS AND THEIR GUESTS FOR
ABOUT FOUR CENTURIES.
IT TOOK ARCHEOLOGISTS NINE YEARS
TO CAREFULLY RECOVER MORE THAN A
MILLION PIECES OF THE PAST,
WHILE AN UNDERGROUND PARKING
GARAGE AND MODERN BUILDING WAS
BUILT AROUND THEM.
( EXCAVATION )
EVERYTHING FOUND WAS TAKEN TO A
LARGE WAREHOUSE, WHERE IT WAS
CLOSELY ANALYZED, LOGGED INTO A
DATABASE, AND-- WHEN POSSIBLE--
PAINSTAKINGLY RESTORED.
THE OFFICE BUILDING'S COMPLETED
NOW, AND LAST MONTH, ROME'S
NEWEST ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE, THE
NYMPHEUM MUSEUM, OPENED IN THE
BASEMENT, PRESERVING SOME OF THE
EXCAVATION, AND SUGGESTING WHAT
A LUSH AND LAVISH PLACE THIS
ONCE WAS.
IT CONTAINS THOUSANDS OF ITEMS,
FROM THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
THROUGH THE FIFTH CENTURY A.D.,
LIKE THIS DRINKING GLASS THAT
SOMEHOW SURVIVED LARGELY INTACT
FOR 1,900 YEARS.
MIRELLA SERLORENZI, DIRECTOR OF
EXCAVATIONS FOR THE ITALIAN
MINISTRY OF CULTURE, TOOK US TO
A SMALL STAIRCASE NORMALLY
CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC, AND
BROUGHT US TO THE LEVEL OF THE
GROUND DURING CALIGULA'S TIME.
AND SO, BACK THEN, IN THE FIRST
CENTURY, 2,000 YEARS AGO, THIS
WAS OUTSIDE?
>> Mirella Serlorenzi
( translated ): IT WAS CLEARLY
A GARDEN, BECAUSE WE FOUND IN
THE LAYERS TRACES OF THE ROOTS
OF THE PLANTS, AND IN THIS
PART HERE, THE STAIRCASE
CONNECTED THE VARIOUS LEVELS OF
THE GARDEN.
>> Cooper: IS IT POSSIBLE TO
WALK ON IT?
>> Serlorenzi: ASSOLUTAMENTE.
>> Cooper: YEAH?
EXCELLENT.
THIS IS WHAT SERLORENZI'S TEAM
BELIEVES THE AREA LOOKED LIKE
DURING CALIGULA'S REIGN.
WE ENDED UP TALKING FOR A LONG
TIME ON THE GARDEN STEPS.
ISIT ALL RIGHT TO SIT DOWN?
>> Serlorenzi: SIT, OKAY.
>> Cooper: THERE WAS SOMETHING
ABOUT TOUCHING THOSE OLD SLABS
OF MARBLE THAT MADE ANCIENT
HISTORY FEEL VERY REAL.
I CAN'T BELIEVE THAT WE ARE
SITTING ON THE STEPS THAT
CALIGULA MAY HAVE WALKED ON.
IT'S AMAZING.
SHE TOLD US THE WATER PIPE BY
OUR FEET WAS INSTALLED BY
CALIGULA'S SUCCESSOR, HIS UNCLE
CLAUDIUS.
HIS NAME IS STAMPED ON THE PIPE.
ONE OF THE MOST REMARKABLE
THINGS ABOUT CALIGULA IS THAT HE
LIVED TO BECOME EMPEROR AT ALL.
THE EMPEROR BEFORE HIM, HIS
ADOPTIVE GRANDFATHER TIBERIUS,
WAS SUSPECTED OF KILLING
CALIGULA'S FATHER, MOTHER, AND
TWO BROTHERS.
AND WHEN CALIGULA TURNED 19,
HE WAS SUMMONED TO LIVE WITH
TIBERIUS AT HIS PALACE ON THE
ISLAND OF CAPRI.
IT SITS HIGH ON A CLIFF, AND
IT'S SAID TIBERIUS WOULD HAVE
PEOPLE WHO CROSSED HIM TOSSED
ONTO THE ROCKS BELOW.
THROUGH SOME COMBINATION OF
FLATTERY AND DECEIT, CALIGULA
MANAGED TO SURVIVE HERE FOR
SIX YEARS WITH THE MAN WHO MAY
HAVE KILLED MUCH OF HIS FAMILY.
HE BECAME TIBERIUS'S SUCCESSOR
IN 37 A.D.
HE WAS JUST 24 YEARS OLD, AND IN
CHARGE OF AN EMPIRE.
>> Wallace-Hadrill: HE WAS IN A
VERY, VERY DIFFICULT POSITION.
I LIKE THE SAYING OF TIBERIUS,
WHO SAYS, "BEING EMPEROR IS
LIKE HAVING TO HOLD A WOLF BY
THE EARS."
THERE'S THIS SORT OF SAVAGE
BEAST, THAT CAN TURN ON YOU ANY
MOMENT.
>> Cooper: WHAT IS SO INSECURE
ABOUT IT?
WAS IT THE SYSTEM ITSELF?
>> Wallace-Hadrill: YOU'VE GOT
THIS ENORMOUS CONCENTRATION OF
POWER AND RESOURCE, WEALTH,
CONCENTRATED ON THE PALACE IN
ROME.
AND EVERYONE WANTS IN ON IT.
AND THEY ARE PREPARED TO DO
ANYTHING TO SEIZE THIS POWER.
>> Cooper: BACK THEN, THE ROMAN
EMPIRE DOMINATED THE
MEDITERRANEAN WORLD.
AND ITEMS FOUND IN THE GARDENS
GIVE SOME SENSE OF THE RICHES
THAT FLOWED TOWARDS ROME.
RARE AND INTRICATELY-CARVED
MARBLE FROM THE FAR REACHES OF
THE EMPIRE DECORATED THE WALLS
OF THE BUILDINGS.
GLASS RECOVERED AT THE SITE
APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN USED IN
VERY EARLY WINDOWS.
AND, LARGE AMOUNTS OF OYSTERS
APPEAR TO HAVE BEEN SERVED AT
MEALS.
MIRELLA SERLORENZI SAYS HER
TEAM RECOVERED THE BONES OF
WILD ANIMALS THAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN BROUGHT HERE FROM
FAR-AWAY LANDS.
SHE SHOWED US THE LEG OF AN
OSTRICH, THE FOOT OF A LION, AND
THE TOOTH OF A BEAR.
>> Serlorenzi ( translated ):
IT'S EVIDENT THAT WILD ANIMALS
WERE HERE FOR THE ENTERTAINMENT
OF THE EMPEROR.
GAMES WERE CARRIED OUT HERE WITH
GLADIATORS, WE CAN IMAGINE, AND
BATTLES WITH FEROCIOUS BEASTS.
>> Cooper: WHEN HE BECAME
EMPEROR, CALIGULA STARTED
IMPROVING ROME'S INFRASTRUCTURE.
HE BEGAN WORK ON NEW AQUEDUCTS.
HE ALSO CUT TAXES.
SERLORENZI SAYS THIS COIN FOUND
IN THE GARDENS WAS MINTED AROUND
39 A.D. TO REMIND ROMANS THAT
CALIGULA GOT RID OF A SALES TAX.
2,000 YEARS AGO, POLITICIANS
WERE JUST LIKE POLITICIANS
TODAY?
IF THEY CUT TAXES, THEY WANTED
EVERYBODY TO KNOW ABOUT IT.
>> Serlorenzi ( translated ):
THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
THE COINS ARE A FORM OF IMPERIAL
PROPAGANDA.
>> Cooper: BUT SOMETHING CHANGED
AS THE YEARS PROGRESSED.
SUETONIUS SAYS CALIGULA WANTED
TO BE TREATED AS A GOD, AND
CONNECTED HIS PALACE IN THE
ROMAN FORUM TO A MAJOR TEMPLE.
THAT'S THE TEMPLE OF CASTOR AND
POLLUX?
>> Paolo Carafa: EXACTLY,
EXACTLY, AND THIS COLUMN HAS
BEEN STANDING THERE FOR MORE
THAN 2,000 YEARS.
>> Cooper: THAT'S INCREDIBLE.
>> Carafa: THEY HAVE BEEN
CREATED IN THE YEAR SIX.
>> Cooper: PAOLO CARAFA,
PROFESSOR OF ARCHEOLOGY AT
SAPIENZA UNIVERSITY OF ROME, HAS
BEEN STUDYING THE ROMAN FORUM
AREA FOR MORE THAN 35 YEARS.
SO, ACCORDING TO SUETONIUS,
CALIGULA EXTENDED HIS HOUSE UP
TO THAT TEMPLE?
>> Carafa: EXACTLY.
>> Cooper: HAVE YOU FOUND
EVIDENCE OF THAT?
>> Carafa: BEHIND TH TEMPLE,
RECENT EXCAVATION HAVE
IDENTIFIED FRAGMENTS OF A LARGE
HOUSE, A LUXURY HOUSE.
>> Cooper: HE CAN'T SAY FOR SURE
IT WAS CALIGULA'S HOUSE, BUT HE
SAYS IT COMES FROM THAT TIME
PERIOD, AND ONLY AN EMPEROR LIKE
CALIGULA WOULD HAVE DARED DO
SOMETHING SO SHOCKING.
HE WANTED THE TEMPLE TO BE THE
ENTRANCE TO HIS OWN HOUSE?
>> Carafa: EXACTLY.
WHICH IS QUITE UNUSUAL.
>> Cooper: ONE OF THE THINGS
"I, CLAUDIUS" SEEMS TO HAVE
GOTTEN RIGHT, WALLACE-HADRILL
TOLD US, WAS CALIGULA'S CAPACITY
FOR BOTH PHYSICAL AND MENTAL
CRUELTY.
( CROWD JEERS )
>> Wallace-Hadrill: THERE'S NO
DOUBT THAT CALIGULA'S BRUTAL.
BUT SUETONIUS SAYS HE'S NOT ONLY
BRUTAL, HE THINKS IT'S AMUSING.
HE TAKES PLEASURE IN IT.
>> Cooper: PERHAPS THE MOST
TELLING ACCOUNT COMES FROM A
CONTEMPORARY OF CALIGULA'S, THE
PHILOSOPHER SENECA, WHO
DESCRIBES HOW CALIGULA INVITED A
FATHER TO A FESTIVE DINNER ON
THE DAY HE HAD EXECUTED THE
MAN'S SON.
>> Wallace-Hadrill: AND AT THE
DINNER, HE INSISTS THAT THE
FATHER SHOULD HAVE A JOLLY TIME.
HE PLIES HIM WITH WINE AND FOOD.
HE EVEN PLIES HIM WITH PERFUME
AND A GARLAND.
>> Cooper: ON THE VERY DAY HIS
SON...
>> Wallace-Hadrill: ON THE VERY
DAY.
AND SENECA SAYS, PEOPLE ASKED,
HOW ON EARTH COULD HE ENDURE TO
DO IT?
AND THE ANSWER IS, HE HAD A
SECOND SON.
AND I THINK THAT ANECDOTE JUST
EVOKES THE ATMOSPHERE OF TERROR
OF THE COURT OF CALIGULA.
>> Caligula: AAAAAAH!
>> Cooper: AS "I, CLAUDIUS"
SHOWED, THE END CAME IN 41 A.D.
WHEN CALIGULA WAS STABBED TO
DEATH BY MEMBERS OF HIS OWN
IMPERIAL GUARD.
>> Wallace-Hadrill: HE'S KILLED
BY HIS OWN GUARDSMEN, BUT THEN
THEY HAVEN'T GOT A CANDIDATE.
>> Cooper: THEY DON'T HAVE
SOMEBODY WAITING TO TAKE OVER?
>> Wallace-Hadrill: THEY HAVE
NO ONE IN THE WINGS.
EXCEPT POOR OLD CLAUDIUS.
>> Cooper: DOES THAT ARGUE THE
POINT THAT HE HAD TO HAVE BEEN
REALLY AWFUL IF THEY WERE SO
MOTIVATED TO JUST KILL HIM?
>> Wallace-Hadrill: YEAH, YEAH.
IT'S AN ASSASSINATION BORN OF
ANGER, HUMILIATION, DISGUST.
"WE CAN'T TAKE THIS ANYMORE."
>> Cooper: LONG AFTER THE
ASSASSINATION ITSELF, SOME
HISTORIANS BELIEVE, CALIGULA'S
ENEMIES ASSASSINATED HIS MEMORY
AS WELL.
THERE'S A NUMBER OF CONTEMPORARY
SCHOLARS WHO HAVE ARGUED THAT
CALIGULA'S CRITICS DISTORTED HIS
MEMORY, THAT THEY HAVE FALSELY
MADE HIM OUT TO BE FAR WORSE
THAN HE WAS.
>> Wallace-Hadrill: OF COURSE.
IT'S LIKE ENTERING A HALL OF
MIRRORS AND, YOU KNOW, SOME OF
THEM ARE CONCAVE, AND SOME ARE
CONVEX.
AND THERE ARE NO FLAT MIRRORS.
>> Cooper: BUT ISN'T THAT
TERRIFYING, THAT WHAT WE THINK
WE KNOW ABOUT HISTORY IS SO
DEPENDENT ON RUMORS, OR...
>> Wallace-Hadrill: BUT I THINK
IT'S AN ENORMOUS MISTAKE TO
LOOK AT THE PAST AS A SERIES OF
SOLID ROCKS THAT, YOU KNOW, THAT
WAS DEFINITELY THERE.
AND THAT WAS DEFINITELY...
IT'S-- IT'S A GREAT MORASS, A
FLOWING SEA.
I THINK THAT ANCIENT HISTORY'S
VERY GOOD FOR PEOPLE, BECAUSE
IT'S GOT SO MUCH UNCERTAINTY IN
IT.
>> Cooper: BUT WHY IS IT GOOD
THAT THERE'S A LOT OF
MISINFORMATION?
>> Wallace-Hadrill: IT'S GOOD
BECAUSE THE WORLD WE LIVE IN
IS FULL OF MISINFORMATION,
AS WE HAVE LEARNED SPECTACULARLY
IN RECENT YEARS.
YOU KNOW?
PEOPLE INVENT TRUTHS.
YOU HAVE TO BE SKEPTICAL.
>> Cooper: AS WE PREPARED TO
LEAVE THE NYMPHEUM MUSEUM, WE
COULDN'T HELP THINKING ABOUT HOW
TIME TRAMPLES EVEN THE MIGHTIEST
OF EMPIRES, TURNING LAVISH
GARDENS INTO UNDERGROUND PARKING
LOTS.
WHAT DO YOU THINK CALIGULA WOULD
THINK OF-- OF WHAT'S HAPPENED TO
HIS GARDENS?
>> Serlorenzi ( translated ):
( LAUGHS )
I THINK HE WOULD BE IN TOTAL
DISAGREEMENT.
AND, I DON'T THINK HE WOULD BE
VERY HAPPY THAT WE ARE SITTING
ON HIS STAIRCASE.
( TICKING )
>> HOW DID A MOSAIC FROM
CALIGULA'S REIGN TURN UP AS A
COFFEE TABLE IN A NEW YORK CITY
APARTMENT?
THAT STORY, AT
60minutesovertime.com.
>> Whitaker: ON THURSDAY THIS
WEEK, THE PUMPKIN PIE WILL TASTE
A LITTLE SWEETER.
THE GREEN BEANS AND ALMONDS WILL
HAVE AN EXTRA SNAP.
THE STUFFING WILL BE A LITTLE
RICHER, AND THE GIBLET GRAVY
LESS LUMPY.
THE TURKEY WON'T TASTE THE LEAST
BIT DRY.
THIS WILL HAVE NOTHING TO DO
WITH ANY TWEAKING OF THE RECIPES
FOR THE FEAST ON THE
THANKSGIVING TABLE.
IT HAS EVERYTHING TO DO WITH THE
FAMILY MEMBERS AND FRIENDS
GATHERED AROUND IT.
FAMILIES ARE PLANNING TO COME
TOGETHER AGAIN-- WITH CARE,
CAUTION, AND VACCINATION--
AFTER NEARLY TWO YEARS OF
PANDEMIC SEPARATION.
AND WHO WOULDN'T BE THANKFUL
FOR THAT?
I'M BILL WHITAKER.
WE'LL BE BACK NEXT WEEK WITH